You've made a great decision. And I say
this as impartially as I possibly can,
but this podcast is it's really the
reason why I started the Diary of a CEO.
It's to hear these kinds of stories from
these kinds of people. And I've got to
be honest with you, I spent about a year
asking this person to come on this
podcast and have a conversation with me.
Today's guest is Dr. Ari, and he's been
on the podcast once before. He's a a
world-renowned high performance coach,
and he works with some of the world's
most accomplished athletes, actors, and
everyone in between as they try and
reach a mindset state that is conducive
with success, with happiness, and with
overall fulfillment. But he's not here
to talk about that today. He's here to
talk about something very, very
different, something uncomfortable,
something unimaginable.
So without further ado, I'm Steven
Bartlett and this is the Diver CEO. I
hope nobody is listening, but if you
are, then please keep this to yourself.
[Music]
Sometimes in life, you have these
unbelievable,
somewhat cruel coincidences that occur
that it's hard to make sense of. And
last time you came on this podcast, I
would define it as for me anyway a
pretty cruel coincidence because we had
a conversation um to do with life
generally and and success and the
mindset and psychology and all the
things that you're an expert on. And for
whatever reason that day, I decided that
I wanted to spend 30 minutes talking
about marriage, cheating, love, and
asking you these um very personal
questions about monogamy, which I've
never done before with any guest ever.
And which I really had no place or
reason to ask you more than anyone else.
And it just feels to me for what we're
going to talk about in part today that
that was a bit of a cruel coincidence.
And you know, one of the questions I
asked you was, um, do you believe in
monogamy? And then I asked you, can you
love someone and cheat on them? And when
I listened to that podcast back, I now
noticed um, why you laughed?
Because it wasn't You laughed. Yeah. And
it wasn't a normal laugh.
It was like a real belly laugh, right?
Like a bit of a nervous belly laugh.
Yeah.
After we came off air on that podcast,
you told me something. Mhm.
And uh it even gives me goosebumps now
thinking about what you said and it gave
the whole team in the room who overheard
our conversation goosebumps as well. So
after our 30-minute conversation about
marriage and monogamy and cheating and
love, what did you say to me?
Showed you a story.
Yeah.
And that was uh about 2 weeks earlier.
I'd been traveling back from London home
and I got out of the train station
and my wife picked me up and we got into
the car and we had planned to go and
have brunch at my favorite little spot.
They do amazing Corvos Rancho sauce. I
was very excited and she said, "Let's go
straight home. I've made sandwiches and
she doesn't make great sandwiches." So I
said, "No, no, I think the branch is a
better option." And she said, "No,
there's something that I need to tell
you." And I said, "Is it bad?" And she
said, "Yes."
And I said, "Is it about the marriage?"
And she said, "Yes." And then we began
to drive back
and I had this sinking feeling in me.
And we're we drove for about 5 minutes
in silence. And then I went to put my
hand on her lap and she said, "Don't
don't touch me cuz you won't want to
after I've told you what's happened."
And that's whenever it dropped. And I
remember that 10-minute drive back home
then felt like an eternity. I was just
looking out the window and we got home.
We got into the house into the kitchen
and I was standing by the kitchen table,
hands rested on it
and I said, "What's happened?" And she
said, "I've been having an affair with a
man from work."
And I remember just tears began to
stream. I I didn't move, completely
motionless. Tears began to stream. And
then she said, "And that's not all." And
she said, "I'm pregnant with this child.
And in that moment,
I felt like I lost a lot. You know, I'd
lost my wife. I'd lost life we created.
I'd lost
uh the dog, our home, her my
parents-in-law, her family, everything
that I'd really held dear. If someone
said, "What makes a meaningful life?" I
would have described these things. And
it felt like they just been snatched
away. It just came
crumbling down like a house of cards.
And then fast forward two weeks and
Steve
decides to ask and I remember because
the first thing No, no, it was
fascinating cuz the first thing you
asked was, "You're married, right?" And
I did this high pitch laugh and I go,
"Yes."
And then and then the conversation
flowed on and and it's themes I'd really
thought about. Can you love someone and
cheat on them? Does monogamy
exist? Is it natural? Are we set up to
live a life where we're in one
relationship with one person only? And
so over the past
18 months,
it's been a process. And some of these
themes have been very real to me.
I just as I reflect on that conversation
and when I played it back um after you
told me, so we come off air, we stood
next to the table and the microphones
and you you explained to me what's
happened. I'm for the first time in my
life completely speechless.
And the thing that blew me away even
more so than what you had said to me was
your ability to be so calm and rational
and objective in the answers you gave.
And even when I listen back now,
although there was that laugh, which was
a bit of an indication, um,
you were able to speak about someone
betraying you or being deceitful with a
level of calmness and apparent um,
emotional uh, sort of restraint
that I I just admired so much from
someone that was right in the middle of
the emotional hurricane and had just
been victim of that act. And um you said
there you know about the topic of
monogamy.
How did that change your opinion and and
and also the subsequent 18 months of
processing on the topic of monogamy? Um,
so as a quick aside, I like that analogy
and we touched upon it briefly about the
hurricane and and it's funny actually
because a friend of mine showed me a
book about a week ago and it was
different personality profiles depending
on the day that you'd been born on. And
whenever we looked mine up, there's a
little meditation at the end, uh, a
summary and it said, "The stillest part
of the hurricane is its center."
And that essentially has been uh a
philosophy that's guided my life where
sometimes there's a storm and it's
horrendous and it's raging. But if you
can cultivate that sense of stillness
and calmness and clarity deep within
you, no matter what life throws at you,
you will be okay. Because the second
part of
whenever I was told that news and and
the tears were were streaming and I felt
that sense of loss and overwhelming
sadness.
It was a remarkable moment where in that
instant and I can only describe it as a
whisper. I heard a whisper within me as
if it was resonating from a heart that
all will be well. Four words all will be
well. All will be well. And I knew even
then I knew whenever you know there's
tumultuous emotion I knew everything's
going to be okay. I will get through
this. I'm going to have to walk through
the desert and I'm going to have to
endure a horrific amount on an emotional
level but it's all going to be fine.
How did you know that?
I think it's something that I've
cultivated over over 105 years and
that's why I do what I do now because I
want to help other people to be able to
reach that stage and and it began on a
journey of um Buddhist exploration and
understanding the nature of life and I
came to this realization that life
involves suffering.
There's no promise that it's going to be
happy golucky and really pleasant all
the time.
really horrific things happen in life.
And on one level, there's no way that we
can ever rationally explain it away.
Sometimes bad things happen, but it
doesn't end there. It It's a bit like
that line that someone once said to me,
whenever you're suffering, don't ask
God, why am I suffering? Ask God, where
are you taking me?
And so I've I've developed this ability
to
begin to view my life as though it's
happening to someone else, as though the
experiences, the thoughts, the emotions
are are something that I can I can
almost take it back on and have
perspective. And I can see it and I can
feel it. But I know that my thoughts,
that isn't just who I am. My emotions
isn't just who I am. That's a temporary
experience. and and throughout my life,
no matter what has happened, even
whenever it's been brutal,
it's often shifted me in a new
trajectory and there's been a new
meaningful life ahead of me. And I and I
knew even then, she's going to be okay.
She'll be okay. It's going to be a tough
road for her too, but she'll be okay.
And it's going to be a tough road for
me, too, but I will be okay.
Anger.
So many people in that situation whether
rightly or wrongly just because of the
way that they are would have reacted
with anger. And for some reason you were
both calm in telling me you're calm now.
And this remarkable thing which I I
think I
I struggled to understand a little bit
is one of your first concerns was her
well-being.
Mhm.
Versus your own.
Mhm. Mhm.
Why?
Because I loved her and
I was in the practice of of placing her
emotional well-being and
her happiness on the same level as mine,
if not sometimes first and foremostly,
but at least on on equal playing field.
And
and I was just so in that habit. And
that was the toughest thing to let go
of. the thing that I still struggle with
today and and I'm still it's the one
part that I realized the other day
that I still had a fear of upsetting her
or of her not being okay.
And so that's something which just
just really developed and and was so
ingrained. And it's interesting on on
the point of anger.
If you'd said like your wife
partner for 10 years, married for five,
has an affair, and is pregnant with
another man's child, how will you react?
I would have said anger. I would I'd be
furious,
but it wasn't there. At least not
initially. It was this overwhelming
sense of sadness. It was just that sense
of loss of knowing that again that she's
potentially done something that she
might regret for a long time. And I
don't want anyone to go through that
experience where they feel like they've
[__] up hugely even if the the future
is positive in that moment. My sense is
there will be regret or at least shame.
And so
it was a sadness because that was
connected to the loss, the sense of loss
of losing things that I held dear. Feels
like you're living outside your body
a little bit. I guess that's what
self-awareness is or at least emotional
awareness is because you're being able
to see that situation which is utterly
horrific for anyone.
Yeah.
Um from as you say from like a bird's
eye view as if you've like
Yeah.
looking down on it.
And that's allowing you not to just feel
your own emotions but to feel empathy
towards theirs.
Yeah. And I think I think that's the
path in my eyes that's the path to
enlightenment. And I'm not saying that I
am enlightened, but I think we're all on
that path and we're all progressing
through it. And for me, that's what
awareness is. It's being able to
experience
internally your thoughts and your
emotions and externally what's happened
as if it's happening to someone else.
You're like holding them out in front of
you and analyzing them, right? So like,
but if you're not holding them out in
front of you and it's happening within
you, then you are just almost like a
passenger on a roller coaster.
Totally. Whereas holding them out in
front of you kind of makes you the the
conductor or the roller coaster or at
least uh
able to yeah understand and if you can
understand then you can address and then
you can overcome.
Totally. I love it. Whenever you're
holding it really close to you you're
fused with it. Anything that happens
instantly will will provoke a reaction
whether or not it's emotional or
behavioral. But when you hold it in
front of you there's a bit more space.
Now you still experience it. I'm not
going to lie to you. It was a brutal
couple of months. I cried every day uh
for maybe 3 months for hours hours. I I
would I would walk and I'd process what
happened and if you want we can talk
about that at some point um about my
process of moving through it.
But yes, it was I'm not going to say it
wasn't um emotionally painful, but
I wasn't defined by that pain. That was
just a part that I was experiencing.
Let's talk about that. So a lot of
people experience grief in many forms
and this somewhat feels like this the
central emotion you described it as a
loss. It feels like a form of grief.
What was your process for moving from
you know finding out that it had
happened to to where you are today where
you're you know you've
quote unquote processed it I imagine as
much as you
might have been able to at this stage.
Yeah. Some you know
what was your process?
So where I think people often um catch
themsel in a in a counterproduct
productive cycle is whenever they try
and avoid experiencing what they're
experiencing. They try and shun it, lock
it away, put it in a box, disconnect
from it, deny it, and they just focus on
the future and where I am going. And
they might try and rationalize it. Uh
this happened because of X or because of
Y. And then they try and forge ahead.
And I think it comes back to bite them
at some point.
The simplest truth is that we can only
ever experience
one moment at a time. And I remind
myself of that. I don't need to think
about right now the financial
separation, the divorce, what it means
about friends or family or or will I
meet someone again or how long will it
be or what will my life look like or
where am I going to live? So many
different factors that could be
overwhelming. I just decided to deal
with one moment at a time. All I need to
do is deal with this one moment and what
is this one moment bringing me and
accepting and welcoming. It sounds
strange but welcoming whatever comes up.
And so whatever emotion came up, I
didn't try and push it away or shunt it
or deny it or negate it. I let it I let
it sit and that's why I cried so much
because it was so much sadness. Did you
write down the emotions you were
experiencing?
So I didn't write down the emotions but
what I did in the next step is so the
first step was awareness and accepting
whatever emotions I felt and and a lot
and seeing that they come and then they
go you know that there'd be moments
where I'd be laughing with my brother
and then crying a minute later and then
talking about something else.
The second step was reminding myself of
reality
because I was so ingrained in
in an internal model of what life looked
like. I have uh strong stable marriage
in which my partner subconsciously
uh you know implicitly I believe is
faithful. We're meant to be together.
We're going to be together for the next
50, 60 years until one of us dies. Uh,
we're going to have children together.
That was my internal model.
And I had to rip it apart. I had to take
it down. I had to dismantle it. And I
had to remind myself of the reality of
the situation. I had to I had to accept
it. I had to accept it's over. It's not
going to change. There's no going back.
the final nail is in the coffin and you
need to take that on board.
And I'd also write any so I'd write down
reminders of of what had happened. And I
also wrote down any insights I had about
the situation that I could remind myself
of. And I wrote down how I wanted to
handle this process. Um I can actually
read a few out if you want. Please. I've
got um so I I I literally would just
write them down on my phone. Um and so
afterwards I I began to split them up
into different sections.
Mhm.
But this one was for the process.
Hold yourself to the highest standard.
Choose actions that you can be proud of.
How you get through this process is more
important than how quickly you get
through this process. Cuz for me it was
important that I still lived with
personal integrity, that I didn't
I wasn't warped or changed or um
consumed with vengeance or acted in ways
that was out of spite or out of emotion.
I wanted to be able to look back on this
in 12 months, 18 months time and still
feel good about it, have a clear
conscience, still be able to put my head
down and feel as though I handled that
to the best of my ability.
With God, you can get through this. You
can become stronger, wiser, more caring,
more compassionate, and more loving.
And that's another theme that actually
the deepest moments of suffering can
actually
be opportunities for growth. Even if you
don't want it, there's something there
that that you can learn and can can grow
from.
You don't need anything from her
anymore.
Um and there and then different
reminders. You have nothing to feel bad
about. You aren't responsible. You have
nothing to feel guilty about. Nothing.
Because there were moments where my mind
would almost begin to in a way play a
trick on me and begin to try and create
reasons um to feel bad or to try and
create shame. And at those times while I
would accept what came up, I decided not
to pursue that line of thinking because
that didn't fit. Whenever I was calm and
clear, this came to me. And so I'd write
down whatever came to me. Whenever I was
in a place of wisdom,
then when the emotion hit
and I'm not seeing clearly and I've got
on a clouded lens, this little baby
became my best friend cuz I'd go back to
it and I'd remind myself and then it
would it would reshift
my mental paradigm.
I have this um before, please do keep
your phone open because I want to hear
the rest of this.
Okay.
But I have this um analogy I make in
moments where I experience a very
similar thing that I'm going to tell you
one example.
Yeah. It's It's the closest I can come
to resonating with what your experience
is. I was dating this girl
and I broke up with her and three days
later I find out that she's had sex with
someone else,
right? And I can only The way that I
described it was I'm flying on this
plane
and I'm the pilot
and then suddenly when I find when I
when I look down and hear the news that
she's just slept with somebody somebody
else. Yeah,
it was like terrorists stormed the
cockpit and they chucked the the [__]
rational pilot out and they were
threatening to crash the whole [__]
thing. And my whole objective as the
pilot is to get back into the cockpit
before they crash this plane into the
side of a mountain because if they crash
the plane, I'm [__] And so
what I wanted to do was lose my
integrity. I wanted to crash the plane.
I wanted to get her back, take revenge,
tell her she's a this, this, and a this,
and a this, and a this. And it was this
because I've got to a place of where I'm
able to hold situations out in front of
me a little bit more than I ever was,
you know, in the past.
I was at war with myself.
Yeah.
It was the terrorists on one end telling
me to crash the plane and the pilot
saying, "You've been here before. You
know, you just need to keep the plane in
the air until you
and and I and I'm so I'm going for a
run. I'm like, "Steve, go to the gym. Go
for a run. Clear your head." I'm at the
gym. The terrorists that And I'm like,
"I'm going to finish. I'm going to
finish. They're back in." And then I
come back and back in.
Yeah. Yeah.
And the crazy conclusion to all of this
was my friend called me
and said a few things to me about
um why she did what she did. My friend
said to me, "Remember Steve, you
rejected her.
She really, really, really likes you.
And she's done this as a way to make
herself feel better for the rejection
that you gave her." And it sounds like
such a pathetic thing to say, but what
it made me realize in that moment was
much of the reason why the terrorists
had stormed the cockpit was my ego was
bruised.
And the thing that coached those
terrorists out the cockpit was my friend
massaging my ego again and and letting
me know that some of those stories we
sometimes tell ourselves when we get
rejected about why we got rejected.
Yeah.
Weren't true. It's not because you're
not enough.
Mhm.
It's it's in fact because of something
you've done. And that was the reason why
I managed to take control of the
cockpit. I did nothing. I didn't punish
her in any way. Didn't even mention it.
And it was and so yeah um but please
two two things come to me there uh one
is this uh emotion of anger so
fascinatingly 95% of the emotion for me
was sadness
5% was anger and the anger struck early
on it was the first night and I remember
I my brother had come over and and was
staying with me and I woke up in the
middle of the night the night of that
day that she told me and it was like My
body was burning. I I haven't
experienced anger like that before. It
was It was almost like I was a flame. I
was uh just infused with rage. And I
began and I really feel for my brother
having to witness this, but I was just
moving up and down
shouting as loudly as I could, "My wife,
my house, my wife, my house." And for 5
minutes it was like a supernova. It just
was
just seething.
And then it burnt out
and I cried and I fell asleep and and
the next day and then the anger didn't
really come much. It would come now and
again.
But what I realized was the anger was
intimately attached to my ego.
The anger came whenever I was attached
to my ego. And I'm very fortunate that
I'm able to detach from my ego the
majority of the time. But when I didn't,
that's when it hurt because it came
about my wife.
As if I own her. As if there's
ownership. As if it's a part of me.
I don't own her. She's free.
My house. I don't even own the house.
The mortgage company did.
You know, but as soon as we link it to
ourselves and make it about us,
Yeah.
then it it's it's a place of
vulnerability because you're getting
inflicted. It's like getting stabbed in
the heart. You feel that,
but it's an illusion because we are not
our ego. You know, we can see our ego
and have a relationship to our ego, but
once we're fused with it, we're in
trouble. And the other part of it is
that
because I don't want to come across like
a saint like I didn't have dark thoughts
or, you know, I wasn't angry and I just
handled it with grace the entire time.
But I operate from a principle that the
mind has a mind of its own. And I think
we talked about it last time.
But essentially, your mind will populate
your head with thoughts
automatically. You're not asking for
them. It'll just come up with judges,
evaluations, assessments, predictions
about the future, past memories, imagine
scenarios.
You know, if I said, "Okay, Steve, don't
think about anything right now. Just for
10 seconds, have a complete blank mind,
and I'm going to say a word, but don't
think about anything." Okay. So, we'll
just do it now. Don't think about a
thing.
Mhm.
Birthday.
Okay. Right. So, even though you were
attempting not to think about anything,
your mind came up with it automatically.
And
from my perspective, we are not our
thoughts. We have thoughts. Our mind
comes up with thoughts but that's not
me. I am the observer of the thought.
Now why is that important? Because my
mind would come up with really brutal
thoughts.
What thoughts?
Like torturing the guy.
Really?
Yeah. Getting in a car, finding him in
the back of the van and doing this
elaborate elaborate of of of what I
would do to him.
Absolutely. Because my mind was thinking
about
about seeking vengeance.
Justice. Just justice. And it was like a
Hollywood movie
and somehow no one found out and I went
back along my day, you know, and so
yes, you can have those or whenever I
was in deep pain, the thought of ending
my life popped into my head.
I didn't have any intent. I wasn't
making any plans. I didn't want to kill
myself. But my mind wanted a way out of
the pain.
It was suffering and it wanted an end to
it. And what is one option? Killing
yourself. And so when I've got a
different relationship though with these
thoughts, when I think about torturing
someone or I think or when my mind comes
up with a thought of torturing someone
or my mind comes up with a thought of
taking my life,
there's no judgment. I don't think, oh,
that means I must want to do it, or that
means that I will do it, or that means
I'm a bad person, or that means that I'm
evil.
It just means my mind, I think, what is
my mind trying to do? It's it's trying
to solve a solution and it's probably
struggling to cope and it's trying to
find a way to make me feel better. M Neo
on this podcast who who came on this
podcast talked about how the mind is
actually you know people think we're in
the search of pleasure but the mind is
programmed to avoid discomfort
we're constantly in trying to seek you
know avoid it and that's why we
procrastinate because we've got a big
project which is we might not feel
competent to complete or you know we're
a bit there's a feeling of discomfort
around it so we go and wash the dishes
or do the hoovering
um on the on the you mentioned wanting
to torture this man
I know right so like a moment of the
mind having
my minded Steve, you didn't want to.
Your mind wanted to.
I'm a peaceloving kind of guy. I just
But I wanted to know how do you feel
about him?
So, it's really interesting. I um
this stage the the process went
awareness and acceptance
uh how I wanted to handle the process
and then at some point I realized I
needed to find forgiveness.
I'm quite a simple person and I don't I
don't like having a lot of uh items or
objects or physical possessions and I
don't like having a lot of emotional
baggage either. I want to travel light,
you know. I want to travel so lightly I
could pass through the eye of a needle,
so to speak. And the weight of
anger or resentment or the feelings of
betrayal
were weighing me down
and I wanted to forgive her and I wanted
to forgive him. And honestly, you could
view it as ultimately selfish because
it's not going to impact their life, but
it's going to make mine a lot easier.
And during lockdown, I was in California
and I was lucky because in Santa Barbara
where I was staying, the mayor didn't
close the beaches because there's a lot
of families there. And he said, "As long
as you uh socially distance, it's fine."
And I'd run along the beach. And I had
this process where I would say out loud,
I would imagine her and I would say, "I
forgive you.
I'm sending you my love. and I wish you
all the best for the future. And I
processed so much by that at that point
because I've been able to understand and
see her situation and in my mind I I
have an idea of how it was created and
why it unfolded.
And so there was compassion there and I
was able to reach that really relatively
quickly. That that was easy. The hard
part
was with him because I didn't know him.
I didn't know his personality, his
background, who he was. He could be a
great friend and an excellent son or uh
potentially a very
loving partner,
but all I knew about him was that he was
prepared to take certain actions.
And so
whenever I tried it with him and I'd
say, "I forgive you." It was like there
was a knot and a wimpse and I'd like and
I would say and I'm sending you my love
and I'm like
and I wish you all the best for the
future.
You're still imagining pulling up in
that van and jumping out and
blindfolding him dragging him sticking
something up his butt and
how do you like me now?
Uh, and so but I would just notice that
I don't do you know there's tension
there and and actually I will say this
was a year after I'd heard the news. So
I didn't try and do this initially. I
think it would have been uh premature to
have attempted this whenever I wasn't in
a space where I had a lot more clarity
and and groundedness and and and process
the emotion. The emotion wasn't being
clouded at this point. Now was what am I
holding on to?
And for a matter of weeks, five, six
weeks, I was running two, three times a
week. And I would just try that try that
process. And then one day it was it was
remarkable. I was running along. And I
said, "I forgive you." And there was
nothing. And then I said, "And I'm
sending you my love."
And I felt easy. And I said, "And I wish
you all the best for the future." And I
could tell that I meant it for them.
or their baby, you know, for them
together as a family.
And I felt at peace
and it's a bit like that saying, my yoke
is easy, my burden is light. Now,
genuinely, it sounds strange, but I
don't really feel anything for them.
It's almost as if, you know, if you came
to me and said, um, I've got a friend
called
Mike and he's going through a really
difficult time. he was involved in a
really complicated emotional
relationship. Um, would you mind sending
out positive thoughts to him and saying
a prayer for him? I'd say sure. Like, he
hasn't ever done anything to me. I don't
have any connection with him. No
problem. It's almost that sort of
relationship now where they're just
other people on their journey. And I had
that shared history with with my wife,
which I look upon fondly, particularly
the first eight years. We had a
wonderful marriage for a long time, but
there's no emotional tinge. There's
it's like an emotional umbilical cord.
I'm imagining it as like
it's a letting go.
Yeah.
It's a letting go.
And so that was that was a part that for
me because I think there comes a time
where you have to say, okay, I process
it. I've processed it. How long do I
want to hold on to it for now? And
that's becomes my own choice. Do I want
to carry this and let it define me or do
I want to finally let it go and see it
float down the river?
And I think you know even you're someone
that has a remarkable ability to
practice like self-awareness and you
know you have that sort of like
emotional awareness as well. And it's
good to hear, I think, for everybody
listening to this that even your process
to from finding it out to, you know,
being emotionally unattached to the
matter to the point that you can forgive
both of them
wasn't linear at all. It was up, it was
down, it was up, it was down, and it was
long. And I think
people sometimes um think that their
experience of rejection or deceit or you
know um any of these things is uniquely
bad because their process to recovery
per se isn't linear and it's long and it
feels like the more I've talked about
this topic and the more people I've met
and you know from hearing your
experiences that in fact is the only way
out and I actually think realizing that
that's the only way out will make your
process out of that deceit or betrayal
feel
normal and natural and okay and
therefore acceptable and and I think
that's a a really important point that
you've made through the story you've
told.
Absolutely. And each person's journey
will be unique and there will be peaks
and troughs and it'll wax and wayne. And
I'm very aware that
it's possible that my journey happened
over a relatively short period of time
because of my history and my background
as a psychologist as a high performance
expert. This is the area that I deal
with. It's what developing emotional
resilience. It's how do you help people
to cope with high stakes environments
when they've lost a sense of balance in
their life? When they're struggling in
their relationships whenever they
experience something in life which
throws them how do you get back up? This
is what I've been trained to do for 15
years. Isn't it weird that life sent you
this challenge when you think about your
experience? Isn't it there must be a
part of you that cuz I think I would I
would think to myself
life is testing me to see if I can deal
with the worst and still maintain the
values and principles that I espouse
like
it it sounds this will sound really odd
uh but I almost felt at times I thought
in a way I'm so lucky because I'm so
lucky that I am where I am when this
happened. If this had happened 10 years
ago, I would have been in a vastly
different space, right?
Because I struggled 10 years to cope
with
what life gave me on an emotional level
and I would react out of the emotion. So
I'd experience it and then I would just
react and essentially that's when we
make terrible decisions.
Oh, you crash the plane.
How we crash the plane. If you look at
NASA um astronauts, they prepare for uh
the sequence of events leading up to
launch and they run through that
over a hundred times from putting on the
kit to traveling down uh to the launch
space to what could go wrong and they
rehearse it and they run it through. And
it's a way of being able to stay calm
whenever there is uncertainty or
turbulence or danger or threat
because that's whenever that's the
person you really want to be whenever
there's an emergency like we talked
about in the podcast. You want to be the
person that still has an air, a pocket,
a space of clarity that isn't affected.
So that even though you're experiencing
all these emotions on a very
physical level, deep down, you're still
grounded. You can take it. And so from
where I was, I did feel
as though I'm fortunate that life has
thrown at me something that in my mind
was one of the worst things that I could
experience. There's lots of worst things
without a shadow of a doubt, but it was
a big one. Um, and find a way to move
through. And incredibly it's informed
even even my work
because in the last year
again whether it's coincidence or not I
don't know the number of clients I've
been working with on relationship issues
has gone up exponentially and it's
issues centered on a loss of connection
a loss of intimacy
betrayal confusion. How do you
how do you stay true to who you are in a
relationship with someone else where you
feel like there's a shift or you wake up
one day and you're in a space where you
don't know how you got there where you
become like best friends living together
rather than the passionate lovers you
were 10 years ago.
You talked there a second about the calm
that astronauts are trained to develop
and how crucial that is to making good
decisions. I I I saw this quote the
other day and it said when emotions go
go up intellect comes down
and um I was thinking about just then as
you said that I was thinking what are
the factors that make somebody not calm
and then I thought and I kind of
answered myself I thought okay so it's
we talked about the ego playing a big
role and so I guess my conclusion there
is the people who will struggle to
maintain their calm in situations like
that that are so personally associated
are those with the lowest self-esteem
and the most fragile ego
and it feels feels like the work that
you've described that you've done over
the last 10 years is really like
building your self-esteem and really in
some respects a separation from ego.
Um, yeah, you've nailed it.
One, we know on a neuro level, so we
know from neuroiming studies that when
we experience emotion, the preffrontal
cortex, the part of the brain
responsible for judgment, decision-
making, impulse control, planning, goes
offline. it shuts down.
So we don't have access to that
creativity, the
wisdom that we have usually. And again,
absolutely I think the journey for me
the journey of of life involves
developing a robust sense of self.
A sense of self that is unshakable,
that is immovable, that still
experiences life and the whole gamut of
emotions and and the beauty and
loveliness of life and also the darkness
and the destruction of life, but isn't
impacted on an essential level by it.
And I think that's the journey and
that's the journey that I work on with
clients. No matter what the outwardly
symptoms are, could be weight gain, it
could be relationship dysfunction, it
could be
struggling to experience that sense of
contentment or fulfillment in life even
though I have everything that life says
I should have. It could be feeling like
I'm I'm lacking or I'm just not doing
enough or I'm not being enough. But it
all comes back to that stronger sense of
self.
and this um you know horrific experience
what has it done to your opinion of
monogamy
because I'm sure I'm guessing from what
you've said the way that you planned
your life ahead you thought when you you
know when you went walked down the aisle
and you said those words till death do
us part you then planned the next 60
years of your life and how your life was
going to pan out
and when you said those words at the end
of the at the altar you were totally
convinced Yeah,
totally convinced that this person was
the the person your soulmate.
Um,
how do you feel about all of those
concepts now like soulmate and monogamy
and till death do us part?
The experience led me to a position
where I began to question my deepest
assumptions about monogamy, about
marriage,
about lifelong relationships.
And in the same way I began to take a
step back and reflect and contemplate
I became very aware that there is a
social script for relationships and it
generally goes the conventional model is
boy meets girl. It's not even boy meets
boy or girl meets girl. There's a first
date, a first kiss, uh a period of
courting.
At some point um there will be sex
meeting the parents hopefully not at the
same time eventually [__] relationship
becomes uh exclusive and then engagement
marriage children till death do its part
and I realize that that is a social
construction it's a conventional model
based on assumptions that monogamy is
natural that marriage is a human
universal
and that any structure other than the
nuclear one is aberant.
And so then I began to think okay well
what are the different what are the
different elements. So on the one hand
we can take and we touch upon it briefly
uh a evolutionary perspective
and we are apes. It's not just that
we've descended from apes. We are apes.
So we're one of the five homo sapiens
are one of the five surviving species of
great apes along with orangutangs,
bonobos, gorillas and and chimpanzees.
And yet at some point we
separated from that psychologically. And
actually the fine print that
distinguishes humans from other great
apes has been described by
primatologists as wholly inadequate.
It's it it's a fabrication.
And at some stage we began to see
ourselves as special and unique and
above nature and exempt from our
primal history because we descended from
hypersexual ancestors. So if the homo
lineage has been around for 2 million
years, modern humans have been around
for 200,000 years and about 10,000 years
ago, there was a shift in going from
hunter gatherers to settled communities
be because of the advent of agriculture.
Now up until 10,000 years ago,
the data now suggests that we actually
lived by fiercely egalitarian
principles. Everything was shared. Food,
shelter,
water, child care, and even sexual
partners.
Casual sexuality was the norm for our
prehistoric ancestors.
For 95% of the collective experience of
our lineage,
that is what we experienced.
And it wasn't it wasn't based on
meaningless random relationships. They
were relationships that reinforced
uh a social pattern that that we needed
to survive. It minimized our risk and it
reinforced social ties.
But then with the advent of agriculture,
we began to settle. We had then we had
land, we had uh domesticated animals and
for the first time private property came
into play and suddenly there was a
change and there's even a change in the
status of women because when we look at
it the human female up until that point
was on was on an equal playing field.
They were as responsible for the hunting
and the cooking and making decisions
about where they were going to settle.
And then it changed and the female
became the property of the man,
something that he had to maintain and
keep. And actually the reason that
property came into play is because we
weren't moving. So it did matter what
happened to our resources. We were
accumulating and biological paternity
for the first time became crucial.
And so on a on a natural evolutionary
level,
monogamy didn't exist. We didn't live in
long-term monogous relationships. Then
we bring in marriage.
And if we fast forward about 5 a half
thousand years
in about 2,350
BC and in Mesopotamia we had the first
marriage between the union between a man
and a woman. And over the next few
hundred years it spread the ancient
Romans, Greeks, Hebrews, they began to
adopt this widespread practice. But
marriage had a diff had a very different
meaning across the ages. In the um fifth
century with Anglosaxons, it was about
securing trade ties. It was a diplomatic
tool. In the 11th century, marriage was
about financial, economic and political
advantage.
uh and as early as the 12th, religion be
became involved and and Roman
Catholicism tied it to sacrament and it
to being a sacred experience related to
experiencing God.
Then about 500 years ago, Thomas Cranmer
came up with the modern-day marital vows
that we read out today. And he was the
architecture of uh English
Protestantism.
And then up until 1858,
divorce was rare.
Marriage was something which was
lifelong and it wasn't really
questioned. But then it became a legal
process that you could apply to do. And
it was still still relatively uncommon
because it was expensive and women had
to prove aggravated adultery,
bestiality, sodomy, cruelty. And then
the divorce gates really opened up in
1969 with the divorce reform act and
marital breakdown could be could then be
cited. So whenever we begin to take a
different lens and and we see the
journey that it's taken and then we ask
well where are we today?
Since 1975
there's been a drop in marriages by
about 30%. More people are now opting to
cohabit than they are to get married.
Divorce statistics in England and Wales
are at 42%.
You could arguably say that the system
is collapsing, that it is beginning to
crumble.
And then I would even take a cultural
lens and if I'm talking too much just
no I fascinating jump super fascinating.
So
culturally um so the Spanish word
esposes means wife and handcuffs.
We joke about the wife being the ball
and chain.
Uh a friend got married got married got
engaged last week and the talk amongst
the boys was this is the beginning of
the end of your sex life. Yeah,
but women don't fare any better. You
know, 43% of American women report
sexual dysfunction. Viagra sales are
increasing every year. They're just
record highs year upon year.
Porn is through the [__] roof.
Not that I would know.
Yeah,
a friend told me.
Yeah.
Um, the porn industry takes in about 57
to$undred billion dollars worldwide.
A US report showed that Americans spend
more at strip clubs than they do at
Broadway, off Broadway, nonprofit and
regional theaters, the ballet, jazz,
and the opera collectively.
We look at the church and
there have been hundreds of Roman
Catholic priests admitting to thousands
of sex crimes. In 2008, they paid out
$436 million to victims of sexual abuse.
A fifth were under the age of five.
And these aren't that's not to mention
the forgotten victims.
And we have to ask ourself,
one, how did we get here? Two, how was
that story constructed? And three, is
marriage giving us what we want? And is
it realistic and is it feasible?
So number three.
So where am I with that?
Yeah.
I'm still touring. I'll be totally
honest with you. I can
say it. I can imagine. Okay. So I can
imagine on the one hand I can imagine
being in a relationship with with a
woman and and being with that one woman
for the rest of my life.
I can also imagine
being
with someone in a relationship and
having more than one sexual partner.
But
but if if it was flipped around and
someone asked me, "Would you want your
partners to be with other men?" I'd say,
"Hell no."
Of course.
Like it just seems Yeah. it that is not
something cuz I'm so strongly programmed
against that even though that's
potentially the biological heritage. I
can't imagine being with someone who's
with with other people. I wouldn't want
to be in that situation. And I'm aware
of the acute hypocrisy contained within
it.
Yeah, I think everyone feels the same
way to some degree. I think people that
tell you otherwise are probably talking
[__]
because they're playing defense against
not wanting to happen to them to some
degree, right?
Um, it's I think it's an ideal situation
for yourself, but not for the person
you're with from your perspective. I
read this book a long time ago called
The Mystery Method
um by one of the world's number one
pickup artist. And I don't know if this
is true, but what he was saying was men
are programmed in a way that seeks um
the woman to be faithful for them
because the risk the evolutionary risk
was if I impregnate you as my wife um or
no, if I if I'm committed to you as my
wife and then you are you cheat on me
and get pregnant with someone else's
child, I will then spend my resources,
my energy, my time raising someone
else's
um child and then my genetics won't pass
on that person's will. And essentially,
if you think about it from an
evolutionary perspective, I then
wouldn't have existed if I didn't have
that concern about making sure my sperm
was the one that reached the egg. I So,
you think about it from an evolutionary
perspective,
you wouldn't exist if your ancestors
hadn't done a brilliant job of making
sure their sperm hit the egg. Mhm.
And one of the ways of doing that was
making sure it wasn't another guy sperm
hitting the egg
by being territorial, by being whatever.
And on the other side, from the woman's
perspective, the book talks about how,
you know, if a woman got 8 months
pregnant
um tens of thousands of years ago, she
can no longer hunt and gather for
herself.
So really, she has to find a partner
that isn't going to abscond, that isn't
going to bounce, especially once they've
had sex. And so the book kind of talks
about some of the the reasons why, you
know, in society we typically think
women are more in search of a
relationship and are trying to, you
know, get a guy more than men are
typically. Um, is because from an
evolution perspective, they would have
died on the savannah in Africa or
whatever if if the guy had sex with
them, impregnated them at a time when we
didn't have birth control, got them 8
months pregnant, and then bounced.
Yeah. and and I don't know how true that
is, but it's something that I've
believed because I've read this book for
some time. So that's the dominant
traditional understanding of human
sexuality
because whenever you look at other
species, yes, it's about essentially an
aggressive alpha male than uh being with
a uh female and knowing that
their offspring is being continued
through that lineage.
There's an alternative which has come
out more recently where uh I know
there's a paper published in science in
2015 that actually showed that what
separated humans from other great apes
was our social organization.
Yeah. About 10,000 years ago we started
living next to water and in camps.
Exactly.
Yeah. So and then we were a tribe
essentially. I've read about that. And
up until that point though,
it's very possible that we had uh
multiple sexual partners
but biological paternity was less of a
concern because our structure was such
that so what we found out now is we
didn't used to live with our close
relatives. We actually created social
ties with other individuals. And so
we're set up in such a way that the
focus wasn't ever on individual
survival. It was on group survival,
group identity, group welfare. And the
reason is it's the group that keeps you
alive anyway.
And so it's very possible that then
there was a shift which happened
actually with this advent of private
property because that's whenever
paternity would matter. Because there's
some huntergatherer communities that
believe when multiple men have sex with
a female
that it's to collectively because you
have to think where does our
understanding of the sperm and the
embryo come from. That's very recent.
It's a very recent biological
understanding. Our ancestors wouldn't
have known that. And there are some
beliefs where collectively the men
contribute to
the production of the child
that actually it's almost like an
amalgamation of the different men then
creates that child and that child
becomes part of the group as opposed to
that one person's child. And this is the
thing just to like challenge that
thinking.
Say that there was one man in the group
that was slightly better at making sure
he was the one that
inseminated the female.
Yeah.
He his genes would pass on his his
genetics would pass on as being slightly
better for whatever reason at
inseminating a woman. And uh therefore
in the next round of you know the next
generation he would have a slight
advantage potent that that the kid of
that man would have a slight genetic
predisposition for being good at that
which would increase the probability
that it would pass on again and again
and again. And it seems like that that
those genetics and that ability to be
good at inseminating, whether it's
through being territorial or being
stronger or being more persuasive or
being more, you know, more of a peacock
um through generations over the space of
a million years from the chimps,
that would create a scenario where we
are programmed to be
through our psychology and our behavior
and our peacocking good at,
you know,
Yeah.
at winning.
Even through slightly more malicious
methods or
Yeah. And then there's also the social
conditioning and the ideas of of
marriage, of monogamy, of romanticism,
of what that means. And and I think what
I've really come particularly through my
work with clients is seeing that where
people find themselves in trouble is
when there's inshment. Whenever there's
too much when there's too much closeness
when actually the identity of one person
is submerged with the identity of the
other
and there's no space.
Did that happen to you in your marriage
where you became more like her.
It's incredible that you ask that.
I have a little announcement to make.
And if you're watching this on YouTube,
you might have seen a little clue as to
what I'm about to say. When we brought
this podcast back and we decided that we
were going to do it every single week on
Monday, we also decided that we wanted
to find a sponsor and a partner to help
support the growth of this podcast so
that we can take it all over the world.
We can produce the video format, we can
hire a big team, and we can make sure it
gets out to as many people as possible.
And so, here's what I did. I thought of
a couple of companies that I really,
really love and companies that I've used
for many, many years and I've been an
avid customer of. And one of those
companies, in fact, the first company I
contacted was this one, Hule. And if you
if you don't know what Hule is, then you
must have been living under a rock, per
se. But Hule has been a huge part of my
life for about four years. I I first
started drinking Hule four years ago
when I first moved to New York and I was
running Social Chain. And the reason I
did was because I was frequently missing
meals. I And if you if you know me
personally, you'll know how true this
is. I will wake up in the morning and
I'll rush through my day meeting meeting
meeting speaking on stage flying
somewhere and I'll get to about 900 p.m.
and I wouldn't have eaten a single
thing. And there's no, you know,
nutritional expert in the world that
will tell you that's a good thing. And
what then happened was I was binge
eating at 9 or 10:00. And when I say
binge eating, I mean like two large
Domino's pizzas to myself. And so then I
discovered this thing called Hule about
4 years ago. And for me, Hu is a
nutritionally complete drink, which
means that I don't have to spend hours
preparing food, which I wouldn't do
anyway. Hence why I was skipping meals.
It means that I get all the good stuff I
need to perform and have a good diet,
but I can have it in like 20 seconds.
And as someone that values time so, so
much. Hu was a godsend. I've been a
customer for I think four years. I've
had my subscription with Hu for four
years. is. So, when I was looking for
someone to sponsor the podcast, I
contacted the CEO who's been on the
podcast before, Julian, and has built
this staggering company. I sent him an
email. I said, "Listen, Julian, I would
love you to sponsor my podcast because I
can actually talk about your product
authentically." And he said to me,
"Because you've had a subscription with
Hule for the last 3, four years, and I
know you're a customer, he was up for
doing it." So, I thank you. And um every
week on the podcast I'm going to talk
about different things to do with hule,
to do with time saving, to do with um
diet and nutrition. And of course, we're
going to get Julian back on the podcast
at some point. Their company is doing
unbelievable things in the UK. If you've
not seen and sort of kept up with the
progress of your I highly recommend you
do because it's one of the most exciting
companies we've seen in the UK in a
long, long time. And uh it's an absolute
honor and a privilege to to have them
sponsoring the D of CEO, the perfect
company to be on this podcast because,
you know, it's a company that is so in
line with some of my central values. Did
that happen to you in your marriage
where you became more like her?
It's incredible that you ask that.
Whenever we first met,
she was the sensible one. She was very
prudent, very pragmatic, very
levelheaded.
She made very safe, sensible choices in
life in general. And she was known in
that way. I was a bit more of a rogue. I
was uh
a little bit more mysterious. There was
probably
sort of, you know, hint of mischievous
of um Yeah. have playfulness
and and there's an idea in psychology
that
we all that we seek in the other person
a part of ourselves that we've lost.
And so there was almost that um that
attraction there. It created that
chemistry. It drew us in together. I
think she was looking for that
excitement and and in a way that safe
danger. I was actually looking for
stability and groundedness
and over time it it connected us and
brought us together. But over time a
remarkable thing happened and that is
just like you said I began to become
more like her.
I became became safer and I actually
lost an intrinsic
part of who I was. I lost the
the wild child that's in me. I lost the
part that's a bit more dangerous, that's
a bit more risky, that doesn't always
say something which is politically
correct. And I became almost like a
sanitized,
clean version of who I was. And that's
not the man that she met. And that's not
the man that she fell in love with.
And on one level it it worked in terms
of
a stable love. There was reliability.
There was dependability. There was
relatability.
But it crushed the desire. There was a
slow suffocation
of that desire over the last couple of
years.
And so I believe that
one day
she woke up and she sensed that loss of
connection which I also sensed too and
that loss of intimacy and she was
scared.
And when the mind is scared it comes up
with thoughts. Is this it? Am I going to
have to live like this for the next 10,
20 years? will I ever get that chemistry
or that connection back? What if it
never comes back?
And when we're afraid, we're then
seeking that that part of ourselves that
we've lost. And so, it's almost less
about the other person and more about
us. It's less about turning away from
our partner and more about turning away
from a part of ourselves.
It's less about finding another person
and more about finding another part of
ourselves in which we feel alive. And I
think the fair would have been wildly
tempting, wildly exciting. It would have
been
all the things it would have given her a
lot of the things that we had in the
beginning that she missed and suddenly
it was back. And even the structure of
an affair is such that
you can't have the other person. And the
forbidden is erotic.
And it's set up in such a way that it
just perpetually creates desire because
it it has to be secretive. It can't be
long lasting for long periods of time.
There's continual space.
Now, if fire needs air,
desire needs space.
And we found ourselves in a situation
which we were seeing each other every
day. I used to be traveling. I used to
be working away a lot more. We we'd have
pockets where we'd be apart and in that
pocket, even if you're away for a day or
a couple of days, there's a sense of
loss on a very micro level and then a
sense of excitement of the person coming
back and reimagining that life together.
And so going back to your point, I did I
change and that's on that's something
which I've learned from. I've ch I
changed and I became
like a squeaky clean version of me and
and she ironically ended up turning
towards what she'd lost. Is
that something you regret?
I could feel regret in the way that I
said it there.
Yes. Yeah. Being being honest. If I
could have if I could have changed on
one level, if I could have changed that,
if I'd been aware of that and I' and I'd
seen it coming, then
I would have wanted to to stay true to
who I am. And that's the path I'm on
now. And I'd be curious to hear your
thoughts. But I
I want to live in line with my truth.
And it's like John 8:32, the truth will
set you free. And I believe that when
we're living in line with our truth, it
saves you. And whenever we
neglect our truth, it it destroys you.
Yeah.
And so if I if I'd
if I'd been able to stay truthful, I
think it would have been a very
different trajectory. I don't because
the relationship worked on multiple
levels and we and and it did. We had a
wonderful um time together for for eight
years. But it's a little bit like like
putting a frog in boiling water. It was
in cold water and the desire is the frog
is alive. You don't notice the heat.
There were unknown factors that were at
play
and it was a dance. It was both of us.
There's no we're we both contributed to
that situation. And I think she wanted
me to be that stable, dependable,
reliable person without realizing that
on a subconscious level, she actually
was attracted to the man that I was. And
I wanted to make her happy and didn't
want her to
be the kind of person that creates t
tension or or or there being too much
grit, but actually tension is what
creates fire at the same time. M
and so the rough edges were a part of
who I was and I didn't need to get rid
of them.
It's so crazy. It's almost quite
contradictory. The typical narrative you
hear about relationships is especially
from, you know, dare I say it um women
movies and on Instagram is there's this
conversation around can I change him? M
and it's and it seems typically that
people want to change their or they they
hold out hope or they want to change
their partner in some way to make them
more like the image they have of that
person.
But in fact, what you're describing is
the thing that ends up saving the
relationship is a finding someone that
you love for the way that they are and
you're attracted to for the way that
they are,
but then both parties having a
resilience to change.
Mhm. um to some degree because of that
understanding that you formed your
relationship on the basis of this person
being like this
and then but then you say okay so
over time people change and in fact in
the last podcast we did
there's a quote where you said change is
the only constant
so both of you are going to change
anyway and you talk about the spiritual
psychological change that both parties
go on
and again this kind of draws it back to
the conversation around monogamy is you
know you're going to change anyway like
you 10 years ago versus you now is
probably a little bit more stable and a
little bit more you know solid and a
little bit more rational in your
thinking.
Um and because as you said in the last
podcast change is a constant.
How do you form a how can you guarantee
that death will do you part
when change might do you part first?
Mhm. Mhm.
And and this kind of brings us back to
the conversation around monogamy, which
is I guess it's my question to you is
like if you what do you suspect now
if not marriage is going to be
the way that you know when you meet
someone what do you suspect? What's your
hypothesis on how that relationship will
be constructed
for me personally?
Yeah, I've got mine.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
But mine kind of
I can tell you mine if you want first.
Yeah. Okay. So, mine kind of draws on
something
and then I'll just say me too.
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. We'll both go down together.
So, what it was interesting what you
said there about um space being
the the air to a flame, right?
And for me that's so critical earlier on
when you were talking about marriage.
One of the factors you you you were
talking about was how
where marriage came from as a social
construct and how it centers on like you
know you know religion and and God and
all of these things and one of the
things that I think is also really
important to understand is as a general
first principles rule if people are
different
and we all are different every single
human being on this earth is different
then the solution should be different
like the the glove we fit is different
we have different sized feet and
different sized hands so the solution to
love or whatever that is, as binary as
it sounds, should therefore be bespoke
to who you are and the life you're
living. And for me, I live a life where
I'm I get my fulfillment out of the
podcast and my work. And that's it's
such a big part of my wiring. I can't
change that. It's the way that I am. I'm
different from my brother and he's only
a couple of months older than me. I'm
completely different. And so as it
relates to love and me having a bespoke
solution to when I meet someone and I
want to have kids or I want to, you
know, want them to be my partner. Um the
solution should also be bespoke.
And so I look at the situation that
would be right for me and it is one
that's really really rellyant on space.
Yeah.
I love being on my own. I'm happy there.
I I love having time to myself to
reflect, to think, um to work on my
projects. Space is such a big thing for
me.
So marriage and the idea of moving in
with someone and then being, you know,
on top of me seven days a week for the
next 60 years is is a is something that
I almost can't understand. I'm not sure
if I'm like psychologically [__] up
and that's why I can't deal with that.
But I love this idea as the founder of
Hu said on this podcast of treating my
relationship with my romantic partner in
the same way that I treat my
relationship with my best friend. Me and
my best friend seem to get on perfectly
well and we and I can't see a divorce
ever coming. You know what I mean?
Because we have that space and we have
the the middle ground that we meet upon
which is the relationship
but we have a fundamental amount of
space um
which we both need. Like in fact my best
friend moved in with me in lockdown for
a month and yeah uh you start to piss me
off like you breathe so [__] loud.
You know what I mean? like like clean up
after yourself.
How lowly do you choose?
We had an argument. I remember we I go
over something stupid like a video game
or something. Um so I going to conclude
the point. I know for me that space and
the lack of being on top of each other
is something that would be a fundamental
part of the relationship I have. I'm
willing to commit because I actually
can't see a world where I would allow
them not to or I'd be happy with them
not. Even the word allow it's like
permission, right? It's like such a
[__] thing to say. But I can't see a
world where I would be okay with them
not committing to me. So I I I'm going
to have to concede that and I think I'll
figure that out hopefully if we can keep
the sex good. Right.
So space and commitment. I hate the idea
of marriage. I don't think religion or
the law have any in should have any
involvement on the topic of love.
I think they'd have a terrible track
record. Religion with homosexuality and
and the you know the history it has on
love and the law. I don't see why a
court would have anything to do with how
I feel about someone. So I hate the idea
of marriage. Some kind of commitment
that offers me space with the right
person where we both understand that at
some point we might grow out of each
other. And when we do um that's fine.
And I'm going to conclude with one point
which you actually said in the last
podcast which was when I asked you about
monogamy and about committing to someone
for life, you said to me
um don't view it like that. Just ask
yourself the question every single day.
Yeah. today. Am I happy to spend today,
this day with this person in this
relationship? If the answer is yes,
fine.
Yeah.
If the answer is no, then there's
something that needs to be addressed.
Yeah.
Thanks for sharing that. Don't use it.
I've actually got a photographic memory
where doesn't have word for word. Um,
what I know for for me is there's
definite similarities in that
realistically I can't see myself being
in a non- monogous relationship and if I
was with someone that would be the
person I would be with.
In the past though, in our last podcast
when you asked me about the definition
of love,
that hasn't changed
in that I believe that love is fostering
that emotional and spiritual growth of
someone else. But what has changed is
what I've realized. In order to
distinguish though between a partner
that you're with and a partner that you
have connection and chemistry and
intimacy with, there has to be that
physical intimacy
which which is maintained and which is
and will wax and wayne but which can
still be a light because whenever it
dies it irrevocably shakes the
foundation of the relationship. And I
don't think I put enough importance on
that. I almost had like a zen-like view
of marriage as opposed to appreciating.
And it was it was funny. It was a um
someone I was speaking to and they were
saying
from a male perspective.
Females want the new man during the day
to be kind, sensitive, loving, and they
want a neanderthol. tie them up, hang
them and tag them at night.
Yeah.
And it but you know it got me thinking
because
what if the same ingredients that lead
to a longlasting loving
relationship or monogous marriage,
stability, dependability, relatability,
safety, protection, caregiving? What if
these are the same ingredients that kill
desire?
Because
what I think is true is that, and I
should just speak for myself,
what I potentially find attractive in
the bedroom might be the things that I
actually stand against during the day.
There might be power and there might be
dominance and that doesn't match up with
how I see myself during the day. And so
then you reach this
conflict. And I think what I began to do
was I began to
become the new man and only the new man.
And actually what I want to do more
often is to tap more into
both sides.
I mean far too honest.
No, no, there's no such thing as far too
honest. We talked about the importance
of living your dream.
That's what I'm trying to lean into
100%. And uh and there's this great
philosopher called Usher who says,
"A lady in the streets and a freak in
the bed." And it's like, and it I heard
that lyric maybe 8 years ago, and I
literally say it to my friends all the
time when I'm talking about the type of
partner that I want. And it's matching
up exactly what you said, the civility
and the class with the lack of class
and the freakishness and the and and
it's it's hard to find and maintain the
balance. Um
I found
Yeah. And because sex can be really
a journey of somewhere that you go. And
so then there has to be that trust and
that safety there. And at times it might
be about uh letting go of responsibility
and surrendering. It might be about
taking control and being dominant. But
it's an understanding
what it means to you and and at what
times they should unfold and and be
allowed to live so that your imagination
can live. because when it doesn't and
then it just becomes an act or something
that you should do or a way of having
children then we begin to feel lost and
that's you know what's happened with a
lot of clients that I've seen and so
going back to how I would want to
imagine the situation is yes it'd be a
monogous relationship with with another
um with with a woman and
I would want to try and stay true to who
I
and still keep keep that whole version
of me. And that's what I've learned
keeping and I've gone back to that. The
wonderful thing is would I you know you
ask me what do I regret it? The reason
also why I don't regret it cuz I'm not
holding on to it is because the changes
have happened and I've trusted that it
was meant to be and it was meant to
unfold that way and I'm much more in
tune with who I am now. So, I finally
got my motorbike license and bought my
Triumph Bonnie uh yesterday.
Amazing.
Um, and I'm doing the things which and I
realized cuz I'm drawn to more of a
sense of risk and danger and actually
activities where I have to be consumed
within that moment and be present. Uh,
and I'm getting back in touch with who I
am and how I want to live my life and
and what I want to stand for. And it's
on me to maintain that with the next
person that I'm with. Another thing I
learned was the space because where we
went wrong is whenever we didn't have
the space and actually I realized I
really enjoy living alone. I love that
freedom.
My other relationships are very
important to me with my brother, my best
friends.
And so I don't know yet what that will
look like,
but it will definitely involve more
space
and and also that sense of adventure and
spontaneity cuz that's what I enjoy. I
want to travel. I want to see different
countries and I I can set my life up
where I'm doing that potentially with
another person or
still pursuing my passions and that is a
safe relationships relationship where
that person knows that I love them and
I'm there for them but I won't always
be.
But then kids comes around
in the same room
[__] up this whole fantasy like do you
know what I mean? Because then
we'll deal with that in podcast three.
But that's that's the bit where I'm
like, "Okay, it's all wonderful and
perfect." I was just thinking then my
last three relationships, they've all
lived in another country and it's and
it's probably the reason why it works is
because I can walk around here in my
boxer shorts all day just like drinking
my heel, you know, eating my pot needle
or whatever
and um being myself and then we come
together
when they come there or I go there or we
find wonderful, love it, great. And then
I go back and have my, you know, my
bachelor lifestyle, you know. Um but
yeah, like I I think um kids is a is a
really
a topic which we would be like
intellectually dishonest if we did it
didn't
Yeah.
address because there there'll be people
listening to this that think okay well
that's all well and good but when you
become a father or a mother
Mhm.
you have to be there for your kids.
Yes.
And there's not a lot of science that
says it's not good to be there for your
kids. Right. Yes.
And in the same way that we can start to
though make sure that we clarify between
what the science says and then what the
script is.
Sure.
Because absolutely we know that uh
children will have better emotional
outcomes and even physical development
and uh situational success whenever they
are brought up with a sensitive
caregiver. Someone who is responsive to
their needs, someone who hears them, can
hold them, give them safety, but also
permission to be able to travel and come
back
and who's invested in that child.
But I'm not aware of studies that say
that the parents have to be living in
the same home in the one house 12 months
of the year and be their lives to be set
up in a certain way. And I don't know
what the answer is yet and I'm not at
that stage yet. But I would be curious
whenever I am at that stage to begin
exploring. And it might not be as
radical as is envisioned at a certain
point in time. But there might be enough
space or enough still spontaneity or
adventure or playfulness even on an
internal level or in the way that you
set your life up
where both partners have that space and
still are able to maintain that passion.
Isn't it crazy how much of life's misery
and failure and um
unhappiness stems from either trying to
conform to the conventional way or the
script as you say
or trying to fit into or even sometimes
answer an invalid question. And we
talked a little bit about this on the
last podcast where I said, you know, I
think so many people live their lives
trying to answer invalid questions like
what number is orange is what I said
last time. And in the same way you got,
you know, the question, are you in love?
Presumes a yes. Just by asking it, I'm
forcing you to to to say yes or no. I'm
also presuming that we've agreed upon
the definition of in love, which again
is just a [__] maze. Cuz no one's
ever told me what that is. No, you're
not born. And they go, "Okay, God, by
the way, if you ever feel this, that's
love, okay?" And you go, "Okay, got
you." Right? Cuz I, you know, and the
word is so loosely, I love peanut
butter. I love my dog. I love my
girlfriend. I love my wife. I love my
mom. And it's like, so what is it?
Different types. It's such a [__]
confusing, complex, nuance thing, love.
And we're forcing it into this yes or
no.
Yeah.
And people will like they'll ruin good
things because they they
they feel pressured or they're unsure if
this is it, you know? And um I just I
just wanted to kind of leave that point
there in a sense of like the idea of
like you know so I know so many people
listening to this will will be
unknowingly programmed by convention and
it's like the first principle thinking
and the ability to question why you're
doing what you're doing
and then I guess lastly to have the
fearlessness or the courage to
potentially interrogate and then reject
it. um that can literally save you in
every facet. It saved me like go to
university, get a job, do this, and I I
I stopped going to school because I
thought it was a load of [__] Dropped
out of university after one lecture,
started a business. And I am, as I've
said on this podcast before, I'm the
happiest person I know.
I reached a level of success at a
ridiculously young age. I managed to
like write us write a new story, write a
new script for how life can be lived.
Mhm.
And um people admire me and listen to
this podcast
basically only because not because I'm
smarter than anyone else or anything
else. It's fundamentally if you go back
to where it started was because I for
some reason was willing to question the
script
and then had the as they call it
fearlessness for me it wasn't fear for
me the biggest fear was [__]
following the script clearly right but
had the perceived fearlessness to say
well this doesn't make sense.
Mhm. Um, yeah.
How does that resonate with you?
Two things come to mind. One is that
like you said before, the solution in my
mind will be bespoke because we're
trying to take a one-sizefits-all
solution, a panacea, and apply it to
everyone. And and we're all unique. And
it's important, I think, for us each to
begin to become aware of the emotional
resistance we have to considering
possibilities outside of the
conventional nuclear family unit and
just begin to think about what that
might mean and and where where we might
be able to see change. And the second
part is to ask yourselves, what do I
think I have to have in order to be
happy? So in relationships often people
think marriage, children.
In business it could be
X revenue, Y setup,
zed lifestyle.
And then we can ask what will that give
me? Why will it make me happy? Because
below will be the emotional need. So it
could be uh in relationships this could
be because I want affection, physical
intimacy, a sense of belonging, uh
stability. For something else, it could
be status to be accepted by others, not
to be judged.
But isn't just a question,
isn't the actual truth based on that? So
on that point of marriage, people
thinking that they think marriage will
make them happy.
They've never experienced marriage
before,
right? So where have they got that idea
from? It's I think that the actual the
fundamental truth is
because they told me it would make me
happy.
Yeah, we've been sold that story.
But what do people really want? What are
they wanting out of the marriage?
If you go deeper, there will be an
emotional need that they're trying to
meet through the marriage that they
think the marriage will provide the
solution to, but like you're saying, it
doesn't. Well, it can, but it might not.
And so, what people might actually want
is
emotional connection. or companionship.
You know, if you said, "Describe the
marriage, the ideal marriage to me,"
they might say, "Well, we're happy and
we're there for each other and I have a
confidant or a best friend or I have a
lover." It's understanding those
different parts. When we've broken that
down and understand what we're what
we're actually yearning for or searching
for, we can then ask, can I meet those
needs in a slightly different way that
doesn't necessarily prescribe to the
conventional model? And that's first
principal thinking in essence, which is
exactly going back to like the
fundamental.
Yeah.
Yeah. Which is how Yeah.
Yeah. And and which is what I said
before is what I love about your mind
because you take it back to your first
principles
and then that's whenever you potentially
become, you know, I just
new things.
Yeah.
Yeah. That's it's such a I I wish the
school taught kids how to think in that
way because the when I the first
principles just going back to the
university point for me were I want to
be a I want to start a business and be a
millionaire. That's what my stupid ass
brain was thinking at that point, right?
So this piece of paper, who am I going
to show that to if I'm self-employed?
Yeah, it's a good point. I don't want to
show it to myself. Mhm.
Everyone else um everyone else around me
is sleeping on their desk and hung over
and I'm going to have the same stamp
that they all have, but that's actually
probably going to work against me.
And I swear to God, this isn't I'll tell
you if it was hindsight [__] I was
thinking that I've got this vivid memory
of my first day at university and my
last um of looking over and this girl
bit being sat on my right and she was
drunk and sleeping on the desk. And I
didn't get into a good university
because I got expelled from school. So I
didn't really take my exam seriously
either again because of the same
thinking. Um, but I remember thinking
I'm going to go I'm going to get the
same trophy as her.
Is that how is that going to help me? Do
you know what I mean? If we both show up
and I was just think and then you've got
it was boring as [__] Like they I've
been running businesses since I was 14.
Day one they were like make a poster. I
swear to God the lesson my last lesson
in my first at university was make a
poster. And I thought this isn't going
to in terms of the information part
that's not going to give me the
information I need. And it was that. And
I walked out of there. I walked into the
business office and I spoke to the head
of business at the university and I
said, "I'm going to defer for for a
little while." She said, "Cool. Fill out
this piece of paper and you can defer."
I never even filled it out and never
went back.
Turns out I actually hadn't properly
registered for university either, like
as I was meant to. So, I didn't really
have to defer to be honest, but um and
that was it. And you know, I want to I
want to move on cuz you spent a long
long time talking about this topic. I
you said earlier on that you spent
lockdown in California.
Yes. which is uh you know I'm jealous.
You don't know and and it cuts both
ways. You don't know what's going to
happen in the next moment. We have a
projection of the way that we think our
lives will unfold and often we become
tied to it and bound to it and any
deviation we can see as a failure of
some sorts. But actually sometimes life
has other plans for us.
And when we don't know what's going to
happen, I think it keeps that freshness.
You keep fresh eyes and you stay
grateful for what you do have while you
have it.
On the other hand,
we don't know what's going to happen and
it could all be taken away from us at
any point. And I've got a good friend of
mine and his father uh just had a stroke
a couple of days ago and they now know
the outcome is he won't be around.
10 days ago I was walking in in South
Ken and 5 minutes after I passed and was
coming back there was um barriers put up
and
a uh refuge collector had been walking
out in a bus and knocked him down and in
an instant
his life was over.
And I just imagined, and I could be
completely wrong, but I could I
imagined, gosh, he he might have a
family. He might have said goodbye to
his wife and the kids in the morning.
And he went off to work. And he had no
idea. And she had no idea. And and the
things that were really that might have
been niggling or causing arguments don't
matter now. Like none of that matters
now. And and I didn't see what was going
to happen coming. And And I, you know, I
lost on one level. I lost a lot and it
makes me really appreciate what I had.
But then on another level, that wasn't
the end to the story.
And then it was as if life said, "You're
on this path and I'm going to shunt you
onto a new trajectory and that's the
path you're meant to be on. This is
where you're meant to be going." And I
believe that it's a part of my path and
it was meant to unfold this way. The
universe is unfolding as it should. And
it's a lesson for me to continually
trust. And that's why that voice came up
in the very beginning in my heart saying
all is well because I know on a deep
level that all is well. It's just about
trusting sometimes letting go of our
ideas and living in this moment.
I can think of a better ending.
Listen, I I don't even you know, thank
you so much for so many reasons because
what you've done today on one hand will
probably be selfish selfish as I as you
move forward and realize that the
release of your truth and talking about
it and processing it with people is
always liberating. But on the other
hand, it's incredibly selfless because
there are so many people that are going
going to have less pain, deal with their
pain better, and understand themselves
and hopefully be a little bit more
self-aware because you had the guts and
the um and the, you know, the humility
and lack of ego to share what is an
incredibly emotional um touching
personal um experience. And so, thank
you so much. It's it's helped me, you
know, and I have no doubt that the
hundreds of thousands of people that
listen to this, it's going to help them
in the same way. Um, if people want to
find you and they want to talk to you
about this, and I'm sure there will be a
lot of them,
you know, the podcast was big back then,
it's much bigger now, right?
Um, how do they find you? What's the
best way to reach you? So on Instagram
it's just gr
i a
uh or my website which is dren r i
a.com.
And what kind of services do you offer
people that are going through you know
various predicaments?
So I do onetoone coaching. So right now
everything's done digitally but
essentially it's uh identifying what
aspect of your life right now is
critical for you to resolve
and then helping you with the psychology
and the mindset to be able to
work through that or work with that. So
it could be emotional resilience, it
could be sustainable weight loss, it
could be relationships, it could be
taking your business to the next level
in terms of how you view yourself as an
entrepreneur. Um
it might be fears, loss of intimacy, uh
imposttor syndrome, whatever issue is
actually there for you.
I'll check if it's something that we can
approach from a mindset point of view
and that's where my expertise is and
then help you on your journey as you
then have a more empowered mindset so
that you're developing that robust sense
of self and you're able to
change and adapt and be fluid in your
journey and keep on growing essentially.
We have um we have such good
conversations even off the podcast. We
we we met up I think last week or the
week before and had just an open
conversation about a bunch of things in
life. So, I actually wanted to ask you,
I've never asked a guest this before,
but is there anything that we've missed
in terms of the topics that you think
are curious to the relationship we have
or pertinent to the relationship we have
or um any sort of learnings that
you've garnered from our conversations
that you think we should be sharing with
people? because I feel somewhat I feel
those conversations are so rich
that I I I you know we talked about so
much last time and um even in our
private conversations I just I just
wonder if there's anything else any sort
of key topics that you
I'm sure there will be like I don't
think we've exhausted our conversation
we'll be back for a third episode listen
thank you so much for your time I
appreciate it I I yeah I appreciate it
so so much more than I've you know
people they give up so much time and
they fly to come and do the podcast but
um the what you've given in today. I
don't think you'll realize how selfless
um that act was because of the value it
will give to people. And this is exactly
why I do this podcast um to hear these
kinds of things and to to to hopefully
make myself better and the listeners
better for hearing it. So, thank you a
million million times over.
Thank you, Steve. Thank you.
[Music]